README.md, before:

# theScore "the Rush" Interview Challenge
At theScore, we are always looking for intelligent, resourceful, full-stack developers to join our growing team. To help us evaluate new talent, we have created this take-home interview question. This question should take you no more than a few hours.

**All candidates must complete this before the possibility of an in-person interview. During the in-person interview, your submitted project will be used as the base for further extensions.**

### Why a take-home challenge?
In-person coding interviews can be stressful and can hide some people's full potential. A take-home gives you a chance work in a less stressful environment and showcase your talent.

We want you to be at your best and most comfortable.

### A bit about our tech stack
As outlined in our job description, you will come across technologies which include a server-side web framework (like Elixir/Phoenix, Ruby on Rails or a modern Javascript framework) and a front-end Javascript framework (like ReactJS)

### Challenge Background
We have sets of records representing football players' rushing statistics. All records have the following attributes:
* `Player` (Player's name)
* `Team` (Player's team abbreviation)
* `Pos` (Player's postion)
* `Att/G` (Rushing Attempts Per Game Average)
* `Att` (Rushing Attempts)
* `Yds` (Total Rushing Yards)
* `Avg` (Rushing Average Yards Per Attempt)
* `Yds/G` (Rushing Yards Per Game)
* `TD` (Total Rushing Touchdowns)
* `Lng` (Longest Rush -- a `T` represents a touchdown occurred)
* `1st` (Rushing First Downs)
* `1st%` (Rushing First Down Percentage)
* `20+` (Rushing 20+ Yards Each)
* `40+` (Rushing 40+ Yards Each)
* `FUM` (Rushing Fumbles)

In this repo is a sample data file [`rushing.json`](/rushing.json).

##### Challenge Requirements
1. Create a web app. This must be able to do the following steps
    1. Create a webpage which displays a table with the contents of [`rushing.json`](/rushing.json)
    2. The user should be able to sort the players by _Total Rushing Yards_, _Longest Rush_ and _Total Rushing Touchdowns_
    3. The user should be able to filter by the player's name
    4. The user should be able to download the sorted data as a CSV, as well as a filtered subset
    
2. The system should be able to potentially support larger sets of data on the order of 10k records.

3. Update the section `Installation and running this solution` in the README file explaining how to run your code

### Submitting a solution
1. Download this repo
2. Complete the problem outlined in the `Requirements` section
3. In your personal public GitHub repo, create a new public repo with this implementation
4. Provide this link to your contact at theScore

We will evaluate you on your ability to solve the problem defined in the requirements section as well as your choice of frameworks, and general coding style.

### Help
If you have any questions regarding requirements, do not hesitate to email your contact at theScore for clarification.

### Installation and running this solution

1. Install PostgreSQL from https://www.postgresql.org/download
2. Download Justin's application code from https://github.com/justingamble/nfl_rushing
    1. Recommended: `git clone git@github.com:justingamble/nfl_rushing.git`
    2. Alternatively, download code as a zip file and then unzip the file inside a new directory.
3. Change to the `nfl_rushing` code directory.
```bash
        cd nfl_rushing
```
4. Install version 1.11.3 of Elixir (preferably compiled with Erlang/OTP 23)
    1. If you are using [asdf](https://github.com/asdf-vm/asdf) to manage Elixir versions, these commands can be executed inside the `nfl_rushing` directory:
```bash
        # Ensure asdf plugins are up-to-date 
        asdf plugin-add erlang
        asdf plugin-add elixir
        asdf plugin-update erlang
        asdf plugin-update elixir

        # Install erlang, and set it as the version to use while in this directory 
        asdf install erlang 23.3.4.2
        asdf local erlang 23.3.4.2

        # Install elixir, and set it as the version to use while in this directory
        asdf install elixir 1.11.3-otp-23
        asdf local elixir 1.11.3-otp-23
```

5. Run the following commands inside the `nfl_rushing` directory, to download the dependencies and compile the application. You may see some warning messages, these can be ignored.
```elixir
        mix setup
        mix do deps.get, compile
```

6. In your favourite editor, open `config/dev.exs` and locate the section starting with:
```elixir
      config :nfl_rushing, NflRushing.Repo
```
   This section contains the settings the application will use to connect to your database.
   Double-check them to make sure they'll work.  In particular, make sure the username and password are correct.

7. In your terminal, run:
```elixir
      mix ecto.setup
```
   You should see output like this:
      `Sample data successfully loaded.`

8. Test your configuration by opening mix and running one line of code. The response should be a single integer.
```elixir
      iex -S mix
      iex(1)> NflRushing.PlayerStats.count([])
      [debug] QUERY OK source="players" db=1.4ms decode=1.9ms queue=1.2ms idle=1342.1ms
      SELECT count(p0."id") FROM "players" AS p0 []
      326
```

9. Verify all the automated tests pass.  Inside the `nfl_rushing` directory, run:

```elixir
   mix test
```

9. Inside the `nfl_rushing` directory, launch the Phoenix server:

```elixir
    mix phx.server
```

10. Point your web browser at http://localhost:4000/

You should see:

![PlayerData](assets/static/images/start_screen.png)

If you now press the "Download players" button, you should see flash message that indicates the file
download was successful.

![PlayerData](assets/static/images/download_message2.jpg)

#### To reset the data:

This application does not modify the Player data.  However, if the player data in the database
becomes corrupt, you can drop and recreate the database tables via:

```elixir
   mix ecto.reset
```

## Design Decisions

#### Overview
- Application was implemented and tested using Phoenix Liveview.
    - Elixir 1.11.3 (compiled with Erlang/OTP 23)  
    - Erlang 23.2.4.2
- Browser testing was done with Google Chrome.
- This application loads data into a PostgreSQL database, and queries from it.

### File download
- The download functionality is implemented using a Phoenix endpoint.  Once the download is complete, a message is sent to Phoenix PubSub.  The Phoenix Liveview application consumes the Phoenix PubSub message and displays a flash message to the user.
- The file being downloaded is streamed from the database to the user. In particular, the data is not first written to
a file on the web server. The advantage of this approach is there is no need to subsequently cleanup the temporary files.

### Scaling to support 10K players
- As mentioned in the File download section, the download functionality is implemented using streaming. 
  As the data is queried from the database, it is uploaded to the user. The data is not all queried up-front, 
  which means the download process should start right away - even for larger datasets.
- When the user presses the filter button, or changes the sorting column, a "loading" icon is displayed. For larger
  datasets this provides immediate feedback to the user.  For small datasets, like the sample 326 records, the 
  loading icon disappears right away and is barely noticeable.

### Implementation Notes
- Some player records have a `LNG` field with an integer, others have an integer followed by 'T'.  Example: "29T".  When sorting on the LNG column, the application simply ignores the T, and sorts based on the numeric value.

### Limitations: 
- sorting by T (T is simply ignored)

Commit message:

Enhanced steps for database config, and added a screenshot of data succesfully loaded msg

README.md, after:

# theScore "the Rush" Interview Challenge
At theScore, we are always looking for intelligent, resourceful, full-stack developers to join our growing team. To help us evaluate new talent, we have created this take-home interview question. This question should take you no more than a few hours.

**All candidates must complete this before the possibility of an in-person interview. During the in-person interview, your submitted project will be used as the base for further extensions.**

### Why a take-home challenge?
In-person coding interviews can be stressful and can hide some people's full potential. A take-home gives you a chance work in a less stressful environment and showcase your talent.

We want you to be at your best and most comfortable.

### A bit about our tech stack
As outlined in our job description, you will come across technologies which include a server-side web framework (like Elixir/Phoenix, Ruby on Rails or a modern Javascript framework) and a front-end Javascript framework (like ReactJS)

### Challenge Background
We have sets of records representing football players' rushing statistics. All records have the following attributes:
* `Player` (Player's name)
* `Team` (Player's team abbreviation)
* `Pos` (Player's postion)
* `Att/G` (Rushing Attempts Per Game Average)
* `Att` (Rushing Attempts)
* `Yds` (Total Rushing Yards)
* `Avg` (Rushing Average Yards Per Attempt)
* `Yds/G` (Rushing Yards Per Game)
* `TD` (Total Rushing Touchdowns)
* `Lng` (Longest Rush -- a `T` represents a touchdown occurred)
* `1st` (Rushing First Downs)
* `1st%` (Rushing First Down Percentage)
* `20+` (Rushing 20+ Yards Each)
* `40+` (Rushing 40+ Yards Each)
* `FUM` (Rushing Fumbles)

In this repo is a sample data file [`rushing.json`](/rushing.json).

##### Challenge Requirements
1. Create a web app. This must be able to do the following steps
    1. Create a webpage which displays a table with the contents of [`rushing.json`](/rushing.json)
    2. The user should be able to sort the players by _Total Rushing Yards_, _Longest Rush_ and _Total Rushing Touchdowns_
    3. The user should be able to filter by the player's name
    4. The user should be able to download the sorted data as a CSV, as well as a filtered subset
    
2. The system should be able to potentially support larger sets of data on the order of 10k records.

3. Update the section `Installation and running this solution` in the README file explaining how to run your code

### Submitting a solution
1. Download this repo
2. Complete the problem outlined in the `Requirements` section
3. In your personal public GitHub repo, create a new public repo with this implementation
4. Provide this link to your contact at theScore

We will evaluate you on your ability to solve the problem defined in the requirements section as well as your choice of frameworks, and general coding style.

### Help
If you have any questions regarding requirements, do not hesitate to email your contact at theScore for clarification.

### Installation and running this solution

1. Install PostgreSQL from https://www.postgresql.org/download
2. Download Justin's application code from https://github.com/justingamble/nfl_rushing
    1. Recommended: `git clone git@github.com:justingamble/nfl_rushing.git`
    2. Alternatively, download code as a zip file and then unzip the file inside a new directory.
3. Change to the `nfl_rushing` code directory.
```bash
        cd nfl_rushing
```
4. Install version 1.11.3 of Elixir (preferably compiled with Erlang/OTP 23)
    1. If you are using [asdf](https://github.com/asdf-vm/asdf) to manage Elixir versions, these commands can be executed inside the `nfl_rushing` directory:
```bash
        # Ensure asdf plugins are up-to-date 
        asdf plugin-add erlang
        asdf plugin-add elixir
        asdf plugin-update erlang
        asdf plugin-update elixir

        # Install erlang, and set it as the version to use while in this directory 
        asdf install erlang 23.3.4.2
        asdf local erlang 23.3.4.2

        # Install elixir, and set it as the version to use while in this directory
        asdf install elixir 1.11.3-otp-23
        asdf local elixir 1.11.3-otp-23
```

5. Run the following command inside the `nfl_rushing` directory, to configure 
   the database.
```elixir
        mix setup
```

Part of the output includes a number of `INSERT INTO "players" ("longest_rush", ...)` statements.  After all of these INSERT statements you should see output
like this:
```
    Data successfully loaded!
```

For example:

![DataLoadedSuccessfully](assets/static/images/data.successfully.loaded.png)

6. Run the following commands inside the `nfl_rushing` directory, to download
   the dependencies and compile the application. You may see some warning
   messages, these can be ignored.
```elixir
        mix do deps.get, compile
```

7. In your favourite editor, open `config/dev.exs` and locate the section
   starting with:
```elixir
      config :nfl_rushing, NflRushing.Repo
```
   This section contains the settings the application will use to connect to your database.
   Double-check them to make sure they'll work.  In particular, make sure the username and password are correct.

8. Test your configuration by opening mix and running one line of code. The response should be a single integer.
```elixir
      iex -S mix
      iex(1)> NflRushing.PlayerStats.count([])
      [debug] QUERY OK source="players" db=1.4ms decode=1.9ms queue=1.2ms idle=1342.1ms
      SELECT count(p0."id") FROM "players" AS p0 []
      326
```

9. Verify all the automated tests pass.  Inside the `nfl_rushing` directory, run:

```elixir
   mix test
```

10. Inside the `nfl_rushing` directory, launch the Phoenix server:

```elixir
    mix phx.server
```

11. Point your web browser at http://localhost:4000/

You should see:

![StartScreen](assets/static/images/start_screen.png)

If you now press the "Download players" button, you should see flash message that indicates the file
download was successful.

![DownloadMessage](assets/static/images/download_message2.jpg)

#### To reset the data:

This application does not modify the Player data.  However, if the player data in the database
becomes corrupt, you can drop and recreate the database tables via:

```elixir
   mix ecto.reset
```

## Design Decisions

#### Overview
- Application was implemented and tested using Phoenix Liveview.
    - Elixir 1.11.3 (compiled with Erlang/OTP 23)  
    - Erlang 23.2.4.2
- Browser testing was done with Google Chrome.
- This application loads data into a PostgreSQL database, and queries from it.

### File download
- The download functionality is implemented using a Phoenix endpoint.  Once the download is complete, a message is sent to Phoenix PubSub.  The Phoenix Liveview application consumes the Phoenix PubSub message and displays a flash message to the user.
- The file being downloaded is streamed from the database to the user. In particular, the data is not first written to
a file on the web server. The advantage of this approach is there is no need to subsequently cleanup the temporary files.

### Scaling to support 10K players
- As mentioned in the File download section, the download functionality is implemented using streaming. 
  As the data is queried from the database, it is uploaded to the user. The data is not all queried up-front, 
  which means the download process should start right away - even for larger datasets.
- When the user presses the filter button, or changes the sorting column, a "loading" icon is displayed. For larger
  datasets this provides immediate feedback to the user.  For small datasets, like the sample 326 records, the 
  loading icon disappears right away and is barely noticeable.

### Implementation Notes
- Some player records have a `LNG` field with an integer, others have an integer followed by 'T'.  Example: "29T".  When sorting on the LNG column, the application simply ignores the T, and sorts based on the numeric value.

### Limitations: 
- sorting by T (T is simply ignored)
